Project Gutenberg's Profits from scrap, by American bureau of engineering

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Profits from scrap

Author: American bureau of engineering

Release Date: August 8, 2016 [EBook #52754]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROFITS FROM SCRAP ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                                PROFITS
                                 —FROM—
                                 SCRAP


[Illustration: AMBU]

                              Published by

                  American Bureau of Engineering, Inc.

            2632 Prairie Avenue  -  CHICAGO, ILL., U. S. A.




                       Four Principal Activities
                                 of the
                  American Bureau of Engineering, Inc.


The phenomenal growth of this Institution is due to the fact that it
has, from the start, anticipated the needs for authoritative information
and adequate shop equipment to take care of the ELECTRICAL side of the
automotive and allied industries.

It has four active divisions:

         1. A Bureau of Electrical Engineering, consulted by
              automobile manufacturers, dealers and by technical schools
              and colleges throughout the world.

         2. A Publishing House, employing the highest
              authorities to compile text books and Ready Reference
              Manuals relating to the electrical equipment of
              Automobiles, Trucks, Tractors, and Farm Lighting Plants.

         3. A Manufacturing and Sales Organization for
              supplying up-to-date shop equipment to the Battery and
              Electrical Service Stations.

         4. An Electrical School, operating this branch under
              the name of “AMBU ENGINEERING INSTITUTE.” This school is
              conducted so that a student can attend classes in Chicago,
              or complete instruction in Automotive Electricity can be
              obtained in the Home Study Course.

                 =American Bureau of Engineering, Inc.
                            General Offices
             AMBU BUILDING      -      2632 Prairie Avenue
                           CHICAGO, ILLINOIS=




                         Mr. Battery Repairman


Before reading the following pages, Mr. Batteryman, just stop a few
minutes and take a good look around your shop. You know your business,
certainly or you would not have a shop, but are you operating in a way
to make the greatest profit?

When you stop to think it over, are not some of your methods rather
crude? Haven't you often thought, when you were doing some disagreeable
job, that there ought to be a better and quicker way? Haven't you often
wished that you knew how to turn that rapid accumulation of “junk” parts
into real money?

The American Bureau of Engineering is not trying to tell you how to run
your business, but we are trying to help you realize a greater profit by
showing you some “better” methods.

Lead moulding is but one of many ways that spare time and material,
usually junked, can be turned into profit.

Every piece of equipment we mention has been carefully developed in our
own shop, every method recommended is one which we have found, by actual
experience to be best for the purpose described.

A strict observance of the instructions will save you all the
experimenting we have done and save you many disappointments. If for any
reason our instructions do not produce the results you think they
should, remember it is a pleasure for our Engineers to help you solve
your personal difficulties.

                     AMERICAN BUREAU OF ENGINEERING

[Illustration: C. J. Buckwalter

President.]




                             Copyright 1922
                  American Bureau of Engineering, Inc.
                             Chicago, Ill.




                           Profits From Scrap


In his every day work, the storage battery service man must deal chiefly
with three materials, wood, rubber and lead.

The wooden parts, such as boxes and separators are pretty well
standardized, can be purchased at reasonable prices and are used solely
for replacements. It would not pay the battery man to equip his shop to
manufacture any of these items.

[Illustration: Figure 1]

The same is true of the rubber parts, the jars and top covers. A dozen
different sizes in stock will take care of nearly all the various makes
and models of batteries which come in for repair.

With the lead parts, however, the conditions are entirely different. All
the active and wearing parts are made of lead, or its compounds, and
practically every battery that needs repair, needs some of them
replaced. Then again there is a much greater variety in the design of
these parts and the up-to-date shop, in order to give real service, must
carry a large assorted stock of end connectors, connector straps, plate
straps and posts.

In speaking of lead parts, however, the plates are to be considered on
the same basis as the rubber parts or wooden boxes, because it would not
pay the ordinary battery shop to try and cast grids, mix paste and
manufacture plates. It is much more satisfactory to purchase plates made
by a responsible manufacturer who has the facilities and capital to
properly develop his formulae and processes.

Every battery that has to be opened must have the top connectors drilled
off as in Fig. 1, which naturally makes a lot of lead chips. These
drillings have to be cleaned off before proceeding with the repair and
can, with no loss of time, all be collected, as in Fig. 2, and saved.
Then the old sulphated end connectors and parts from “junked” batteries
accumulate very fast.

[Illustration: Figure 2]

This then is the situation—The battery service station is constantly in
need of new lead parts. Should they be obtained from a manufacturer at a
price that includes material, labor and the manufacturer's
profit—OR—should equipment be purchased that will permit of moulding
these same parts from the accumulated scrap lead at a cost of nothing
but the time employed in pouring, with no cost for material and no
“Profits” added?

No matter how cheap you think you are buying your lead parts, just
compare the market price per pound on lead with the weight of a few of
your “cheapest” ones.

It is now common practice to melt some of this accumulation of scrap
lead and pour it into sticks or bars for use in lead burning on repair
work. A great amount, especially old groups, is generally sold at a low
price in order to get it out of the way. The one important fact, and one
generally overlooked, is, that the battery man who melts lead and moulds
it into sticks for lead burning, certainly is able to melt the same
metal and mould it into the lead parts he requires, provided, of course,
that he has the proper moulds.

Many a wide awake man has whittled a wooden mould for some part that he
wanted in a hurry and couldn't wait for the manufacturer to deliver.
Naturally this condition, really an effort to render service to the
customer, created a demand for moulds of a permanent character.

In an effort to supply this demand, the moulds that have been produced
were all made for some individual part, were light in weight and easily
became overheated, making them hard to handle and often burning the
workman's hands.

[Illustration: Figure 3]

From a business standpoint, it would certainly be mighty profitable for
a battery shop to be able at a moment's notice, to convert junk lead
into new salable parts. In addition to the large profit from the sale of
these new parts, another good feature, is that, instead of tieing up a
lot of capital in stock, the new parts can be made as needed, without a
cent of investment.

From a service standpoint, it is a cheaper and faster process to cast a
new top connector than to spend a lot of valuable time, whittling an old
one so that it can be used again.

How much time have you or your men wasted cleaning up an old terminal as
in Fig. 3, so that you could burn it on again?

All new connectors and terminals put on a rebuilt or reinsulated job
make the customer feel that he is getting a real repair. He sees a new
finished job.

From an electrical standpoint, the new parts mean better work, because
better burning can be done, certainly a new connection will allow the
battery to deliver more current than an old partly sulphated one could
ever do.


                    CAN YOU MAKE GOOD LEAD CASTINGS?

The question that naturally comes up is, can the ordinary battery man
make good lead castings? We will answer “Yes,” very emphatically. There
is nothing mysterious about the work and all the talk of alloys,
compounds and formulae does not mean a great deal.

Pure lead is not hard or rigid enough to make good battery parts,
therefore, it is necessary to add some other metal that will provide the
strength, not be affected by the acid and not increase the resistance
electrically. Antimony has all the necessary qualities, and is,
therefore, commonly used by mixing it with the pure lead.

[Illustration: Figure 4]

The various manufacturers recommend from 2 to 12 percent antimony, as
the proper combination, but in buying new pig lead for castings, a 4
percent antimony compound is very satisfactory.

In using old battery lead, however, due to chemical action the
proportion of antimony is apt to be too high to produce perfect
castings. This usually shows up by cracks or shrinkage, as in Figure 4.
To overcome this trouble, pure lead is added, until a perfect casting is
made. Pure lead can be purchased (in the form of bars, lead pipe, or
sheet lead) from a manufacturer such as the National Lead Company—your
accessory jobber, the local plumber, or the junk dealer. When buying
from a junk dealer, however, care =must= be taken that there is no
solder or tin present.


                        PREPARATION OF THE LEAD

In order to pour the lead some means of melting and a proper container
must be provided.

As pure lead melts at about 620°F., and antimony at 785°F., an ordinary
gas flame will furnish sufficient heat. For the small shop, without an
artificial gas supply, a plumber's furnace which can be secured from
Hardware Jobber or Plumber Jobber will work satisfactorily. See page 19
for gas melting pots.

An ordinary cast iron solder pot will be found the most suitable
container. It should be about 8 inches in diameter.

It is advisable to obtain as large a pot as above, because for steady
pouring a sufficient supply of melted metal should always be available.
Then too, the constant addition of scrap or pig lead in a small pot will
often change the proportion of antimony so that the castings crack and
have to be melted over again.

Wash the pot thoroughly with gasoline or kerosene to remove all traces
of oil. Then after it has been carefully dried, put it over the flame
and heat it gradually. Do this before putting in any lead.

The only other equipment necessary to handle the melted lead is a ladle.
For this purpose a malleable iron melting ladle five inches in diameter
should be purchased. It can be used for stirring, skimming and pouring,
and the type with a spout, illustrated in Fig. 5 will be found most
suitable. The ladle should be cleaned and treated exactly like the
melting pot.

[Illustration: Figure 5]

The scrap or pig lead can now be put in the pot and melted. It is a time
saving plan to pick out carefully all the pieces of wood, rubber and
sealing compound from the scrap lead before it is put in the pot. Old
plates are not worth while melting, but a lot of good lead can be
salvaged by sawing the strap and post off old groups. Above all things
make sure that no wet parts or moisture of any kind ever gets into the
lead pot.


                           CLEANING THE LEAD

As the lead melts most of the dross or dirt will come to the top and
float. When all the pieces are melted stir the lead with the ladle and
then skim off all the dirt.

To help the cleaning process a piece of paraffin can be dropped into the
pot. After it has burned, the dross is more easily skimmed off.

Another method of cleaning is to add to every ten pounds of metal, one
teaspoonful of equal parts of powdered rosin, borax and flour of
sulphur. Stir this compound in a little and when the lead is at the
proper temperature there will be a flare, flash or a little burning. A
sort of tinfoil popcorn effect will be noticed floating on top of the
metal. Continue stirring until this melts down and then skim off the
soft particles.

An easy way to test the temperature of the melted lead is to insert the
end of a pine stick for a moment. When the wood blackens or burns, the
lead is hot enough to pour.

Whenever the lead is in melted form and exposed to the air, as in the
iron pot, there will be a slight oxidation take place which appears as a
yellowish-red scum. Do not confuse this with the dross and dirt which is
to be skimmed off, but if the scum gets thick, then skim it off before
pouring any of the metal.


                          PREPARING THE MOULD

One of the greatest difficulties in making lead castings has been to get
the metal to completely fill the mould. There are several reasons for
this, but they can easily be overcome.

If the mould, which is generally made of iron, is very cold, it will
chill the melted lead and cause it to become solid before it has reached
all parts.

The surface of a cast iron mould is very porous, and the melted lead,
partially entering the pores of the iron, is held back long enough to
chill and set.

To remedy these faults, it is sometimes advisable to heat the mould in
order to get perfectly shaped castings.

To close the pores of the iron moulds they are sometimes “smoked” with a
flame like that of “Prest-O-Lite” gas or else dusted with graphite.

[Illustration: Figure 6]

The AMBU mould compound has been developed to eliminate the necessity
for heating or smoking the mould—it remedies all the pouring troubles
and in addition, has chemical ingredients that aid in preventing the
mould from rusting. AMBU mould compound is placed in a little sack,
contained in each can, and the surface of the mould dusted with the
sack, as shown in Figure 6.

The compound completely fills the pores of the iron, produces perfect
castings with a cold mould and prevents the finished part from sticking.
It does not wear off as quickly as the “smoke,” and dusting from time to
time, while castings are being made will produce a high polish on the
mould surface which will result in even better castings.

The mould in Figure 6 is the new AMBU Washburn combination link mould,
which casts 15 parts, being reversible much like the ordinary “waffle
iron.” The side being “dusted” casts four top connectors of different
lengths.


                            POURING THE LEAD

Placing the mould as in Figure 7, the lead is poured in the four
openings until the metal projects slightly above the top.

To pour properly first skim the dross as previously explained, then with
the ladle, push the film of oxide away and dip into the clean pure lead.
Pour steadily until the mould is filled and the metal projects slightly
above the top. As it cools there will be quite a little contraction
which takes up most of the excess lead.

[Illustration: Figure 7]

=Never=, under any conditions, stop pouring with a mould partially
filled. Always be sure there is enough melted lead in the ladle to
completely fill the mould, before starting to pour.

The mould can now be easily opened by pulling on the handles especially
if it has been properly dusted with the Ambu Mould Compound.

After the mould is opened, Figure 8, the castings are easily removed,
without damage to either the mould or the casting proper. The workman
does not, at any time, handle the hot parts of the mould or the hot
castings.

[Illustration: Figure 8]

The mould weighs 25 pounds, and is large enough to absorb sufficient
heat to allow continuous pouring without becoming overheated. It is
solid enough to be used without the need of a vise.


                         IMPORTANT INSTRUCTIONS

In all lead moulding, there are several important points to remember:

1. Never put anything in the lead pot that is not perfectly dry. A few
drops of water in a pot of melted lead will cause an explosion and the
hot lead will be thrown all over the shop burning and perhaps blinding
the workman.

2. Have all moulds clean and dry.

3. Keep the melted lead in the lead pot clean at all times.

4. Always completely fill each mould at one pouring.

5. Dust moulds well with Ambu mould compound before pouring.

6. When castings “shrink” and crack, add pure lead to that in the pot
until the trouble is remedied.

7. Be sure melted lead is of proper temperature, by pine stick test,
before starting to pour.

8. Remove castings as soon as they set, to prevent the mould from
becoming too hot.

9. A perfect casting, that breaks when taken out of the mould, has
probably not been allowed sufficient time to “set” or cool properly.

10. Never use a hammer on the surface of the mould. If a casting should
stick, pry it out.


                      AMBU COMBINATION LINK MOULD

Using both sides, this mould casts five of the most used connectors for
all batteries, using Standard Jars, 7-9-11-13-15 Plate four end
connectors (two Dodge Tapers and two Standard Tapers, Negative and
Positive), one end connector, ⅜-inch wire leed used on 12-volt Maxwell
and other cars using wire leed. One small wire leed to connect with end
post on storage battery requiring direct connection. Post support rings,
which fit the two sizes standard rubber covers; also fit perfectly all
posts cast with our post mould. Two handy washers that sometimes are
badly needed when installing a new or rent battery.

[Illustration: Figure 8A[1]]

Extra taper plugs can be furnished, also extra bushings for different
size cable. Standard equipment as furnished includes four taper plugs,
one large and one small cable bushing.

The top connectors most frequently replaced are the taper end
connections and end connections with wire cable leads. For battery men
desiring these parts, but not the large combination link mould, the
AMBU-Washburn terminal mould, Figure 9, has been designed. It has the
same general good features of the larger mould, and casts four end
connectors, one wire cable leed and two washers.

[Illustration: Figure 9[1]]


                         AMBU POST STRAP MOULD

Perhaps the most expensive item of a stock in a battery station, is the
supply of positive and negative groups. While two or three sizes of
plates will fit practically every battery, each size battery requires a
different size of group.

[Illustration: Figure 10[1]]

The AMBU-Washburn Post Strap Mould has been developed in order that a
comparatively small stock of plates can be instantly available for
making any size of group. You will notice in Figure 10, that the same
features, as those of the link mould of Figure 8 are used, namely; a
large substantial base, no need of handling hot parts and the easy
removal of castings. All parts of the moulds are carefully machined to
produce perfect castings and the patented movable tooth rack will make
odd or even numbers of teeth on the post strap. The teeth are correctly
spaced for all standard batteries, or by reversing the tooth rack, blank
posts can be cast.

Two bushings, bored and reamed for standard size posts, are furnished,
but special bushings are available making it possible to cast any type
of post strap.


                    AMBU PRODUCTION POST STRAP MOULD

For the large shop or manufacturer, the AMBU-Washburn Post Strap Mould,
is made with the special indexing feature of Figure 11. This is easily
adjustable and will cast straps of both odd and even numbers of teeth
for 7 to 19 plate groups. Otherwise its construction and appearance is
the same as Figure 10.

Both of these moulds are made for real use and will turn out three
perfect castings per minute. This unusual speed can be maintained
because the castings are easily removed. In Figure 10, the upper part of
the mould is resting on a part of the handle made for that purpose and a
slight blow on a hardwood stick, on the top of the post, will drop the
casting instantly.

[Illustration: Figure 11[1]]


                       AMBU CELL CONNECTOR MOULD

The AMBU-Washburn Cell Connector Mould is a combination mould which will
cast practically all of the cell connectors used on standard storage
batteries, 7-11-13 and 15 plate, such as the Exide, Willard, U. S. L.,
Vesta, Philadelphia and other nationally known batteries. Its design is
similar to our Link Combination Mould.

Made of fine gray iron, carefully machined. Castings are easily removed,
and it is heavy enough so that it will not overheat where speed is
required.

[Illustration: Figure 12]

After re-insulating or repairing, the job looks more complete and
satisfactory to your customer if the battery is furnished with a new set
of connectors. Use your scrap lead and make new connectors for each job.
It pays.


                            AMBU SCREW MOULD

The lead capped screws of the taper type terminal are another of the
frequently replaced parts. Although the round knurled head type is no
longer installed, a great many men still use pliers on the square head
terminal screws with the result that the soft square lead head is
damaged to such an extent that a tight connection cannot be made.

The AMBU-Washburn Screw Mould, Figure 13, will cast standard square
edged heads on four screws in one operation, two ^5⁄_{16}-inch and two
⅜-inch. It has screw adjustments in the base, making it adaptable to any
length screw.

[Illustration: Figure 13[1]]

As the finished screws are removable from the top, the position of the
mould is not changed while in use and castings can be made at the rate
of 12 screws a minute.


                         AMBU LEAD STICK MOULD

In order to properly burn in and assemble the new lead parts, it is
necessary that they be fused and new lead added, and this requires that
a supply of lead sticks be available. These are usually made by melting
the smaller particles of scrap and junk lead which is cast in convenient
size.

The Ambu Mould, Figure 14, is especially designed for this purpose. It
is made of heavy sheet iron, die stamped into grooves and mounted on a
wooden base with a strong wooden handle at one end. A heavy pad of
asbestos is placed under the iron to protect the wood.

[Illustration: Figure 14[1]]

This construction allows the lead to completely fill the grooves before
cooling, but prevents the mould from becoming exceedingly hot with
constant pouring. A pair of these moulds will keep one workman busy, as
he pours one, the other is cooling. This eliminates all waiting and
waste of time.

The sticks made are 15 inches long, ^5⁄_{16} inch thick, ⅜ inch wide at
the top and ¼ inch at the bottom. In pouring in an open mould of this
type, pour the lead in each groove at one end, so that the dross will
all gather in one spot. Never move the ladle along the groove when
pouring, as this will scatter the dross and make the entire stick dirty.

When poured at one end only, a short length of the stick may be broken
off, thus removing all the dross.

Dusting the mould occasionally with Ambu mould compound will produce
better castings and permit greater speed in the work.


                        AMBU PLATE BURNING RACK

The building of groups, even after the plates and post straps are
secured is a job that requires quite a lot of skill. Before the plates
can be burned to the strap, they must be absolutely parallel, must be
the correct distance apart, and the top surface of the strap must be at
right angles to the surface of the plates.

The Ambu Plate Burning Rack, Figure 15, has been designed to easily
secure the proper conditions. It consists of a wooden base with six
different sets of slots properly spaced which cares for 98% of the
batteries on the market. The guide bar or “comb” on top is slotted to
match up with the base. (See figure 15.)

[Illustration: Figure 15[1]]

The positions of the base and comb are so arranged that the plates are
securely held on opposite corners, at exactly the right distance apart
and are absolutely straight and parallel.

The wooden base prevents the plate proper from coming in contact with
any metal and thus eliminates any possibility of later trouble due to
impurities in the cell.

[Illustration: Figure 16[1]]

In order to accommodate the different sizes and spacings, the comb can
be adjusted vertically and the slots are arranged in groups of different
spacings. These adjustments are flexible enough to allow the setting up
of practically all the various groups used in the different makes and
type of batteries.

Special fittings are provided so that after the plates and post are
properly set a form can be built on the comb which not only locks the
plates in the comb but prevents the hot lead from running off while
burning and makes the finished strap of exactly the proper dimensions to
properly fit into the jar.

For use in the smaller shop the small Ambu Plate Burning Rack, Figure
16, is recommended. It has all the features of the larger rack but the
spacings of the combs limit it to the ^7⁄_{64}" and ⅛" spacings such as
are found in all the popular batteries.

-----

Footnote 1:

  Prices, page 17


                           AMBU POST BUILDERS

After the top connectors have been drilled off and the group is to be
reassembled in the repaired battery, in order to make a good quick weld
to the top strap, the post must be built up to its original height.

[Illustration: Figure 17. See bottom of page]

The Ambu Post Builders, Figure 17, have been built to speed up the post
building process. They are made of high grade steel and are of the
proper size to rebuild all the standard battery posts.

Simply place the proper Ambu Post Builder on the stub post, and burn in
molten lead to the proper height. The construction is such that the post
builder is easily removed, leaving a new and perfectly sized post for
burning to the cell connector.

The set of ten, illustrated in Figure 17, covers all standard makes of
batteries.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  =Following are prices of equipment illustrated in preceding pages=
  which may be purchased from the Battery Appliance Division, American
  Bureau of Engineering, Inc., 2632 Prairie Avenue, Chicago, or from
  your Jobber.

    Adjustable Screw Mould (Fig. 13)                         $12.50
    Battery Post Builders. Set of Ten (Fig. 17)                2.00
    Ladle for Pouring Lead and Sealing Compound (Fig. 17)      2.75
    Lead Stick Moulds (Fig. 14). (Pair, $2.75), each           1.50
    Link Combination Mould (Fig. 8A) complete                 35.00
    Mould Compound for making castings “come clean” (Fig. 6)    .50
    Plate Burning Rack, Large Type “B” (Fig. 15)               8.75
    Plate Burning Rack, Small Type “A” (Fig. 16)               5.95
    Post Strap Mould (Fig. 10) complete                       18.00
    Production Post Strap Mould (Fig. 11) complete            35.00
    Terminal Mould (Fig. 9) complete                           9.85

                  *       *       *       *       *




                   AMBU HELPS for the Service Station


                  *       *       *       *       *


                  Johnson Direct-jet Lead Melting Pots

[Illustration: No. 300]

[Illustration: No. 8]

In line with our desire to serve the Battery Service Stations of the
country, we have arranged to offer the Johnson Direct-jet Gas-fired
Melting Pots. These furnaces use either natural or manufactured gas.
They embody a special patented Gas-regulator which permits of a quick
change in the size of the gas orifice, by the turn of a wrench.

This Regulator throws a sharp, clean jet of gas straight up the center
of the mixing tube, giving the nearest approach to 100% combustion that
can be imagined.

=No Blowers or Forced Draft are necessary. City gas pressure is enough.=

=No. 300 Pot.= Melts 150 lbs. lead at a charge, using only 40 cubic feet
of city gas per hour. Has 3 Direct-jet Burners. No forced draft
necessary. Height, 28 inches; weight, 100 lbs. Price f. o. b. Cedar
Rapids, Iowa, $25.00. Stock No. MJP1.

  =No. 8 Combined Torch and Pot.= Melts 25 lbs. of lead at a charge.
  Height, 14 inches; weight, 9½ lb. Single adjustable burner, with
  pilot. Can be used as an efficient hand torch. Consumes 20 to 25
  cubic feet of gas per hour. Price complete with 6 inch Pot, as
  shown, f. o. b. Cedar Rapids, Iowa, $9.00. Stock No. MJP2.

                            =Send orders to

                       BATTERY APPLIANCE DIVISION

                  AMERICAN BUREAU OF ENGINEERING, INC.
                          2632 Prairie Avenue
                             Chicago, Ill.=

                PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE

                  *       *       *       *       *




  AMBU PRODUCTS that MAKE MONEY and SAVE TIME FOR BATTERY REPAIR SHOPS


                  *       *       *       *       *


                         AMBU Battery Steamers

[Illustration]

Softens sealing compound on batteries. Within less than five minutes
prepares them so that elements can be easily removed.

Automatic valve regulates water supply. Steam is quickly produced. Saves
time and fuel cost.

For use with gas, gasoline, kerosene or electric stoves. Has six outlets
and adjustable valve for opening the required number of outlets.

For Battery Men desiring to steam one or more batteries at one time,
depending upon their size, we offer the Type “A” Steamer with Steaming
Box.

[Illustration]

AMBU CONDENSER FOR DISTILLING WATER, accompanies either type Steamer, if
desired. When Steamer is not being used for steaming batteries, and when
used in conjunction with this Condenser, will produce about one gallon
of distilled water per hour at very small cost.

         Type “B” Ambu Steamer complete with Condenser
         Type “B” Ambu Steamer without Condenser        Prices
         Type “A” Ambu Steamer complete with Condenser      on
         Type “A” Ambu Steamer without Condenser       request
         Ambu Condenser for Distilling Water

                  *       *       *       *       *


                        AMBU Battery Plate Press

[Illustration]

Three Groups of Plates Pressed at One Time

With the Ambu Plate Press there is no possibility of iron, the greatest
enemy of a battery, touching the plates.

In discharged negative plates, the active material is bulged out and
must be pressed back flush with the grids before the plates can be used
again.

[Illustration]

The Ambu Battery Plate Press is made of heavy hardwood timber with two
horizontal wooden jaws between which the battery plates are pressed. A
set of lead covered troughs carries away the acid. The upper jaw of the
press is attached to a screw shaft for raising or lowering it. A
complete set of transite boards for placing between the plates, and a
substantial wall support are included in the purchase price. Press
complete, including set of press separator boards sufficient to press
three groups, and substantial wall support. Price on request.

Ambu Press Separator Boards in sets as above also may be purchased
separately. Price on request.

                  *       *       *       *       *


                      AMBU Compound and Lead Ladle

[Illustration]

A ladle that will permit of pouring sealing compound into the small
openings between top covers or jars without spilling or slopping over
top of battery. With the special center drain controlled by taper pin
with touch of your thumb you are able to control the flow of sealing
compound from the stream as fine as a pin to a stream as thick as your
thumb.

Designed also for pouring lead, and has many advantages over ordinary
ladle.

Made of forged malleable iron, extra deep, with two lips in addition to
center spout, four inches in diameter. Price on request.

                  *       *       *       *       *




  AMBU PRODUCTS that MAKE MONEY and SAVE TIME FOR BATTERY REPAIR SHOPS


                  *       *       *       *       *


                         AMBU Battery Test Set

[Illustration: Cadmium Leads Discharge Prod]

Consisting of a high grade accurate voltmeter with two scales,
permitting readings as high as 25 volts; Cadmium Leads, and Pair
discharge prods and leads. With this complete set all tests necessary to
determine the inside condition of a battery can be made, except those
obtained through hydrometer readings. Sold as a complete set or as
individual units. Price on request.

                  *       *       *       *       *


                          AMBU Battery Carrier

[Illustration: The AMBU WAY is the BETTER WAY]

The AMBU Battery Carrier, designed to make the carrying of batteries
easy, as well as the removing and placing of batteries in cars. An
unusually handy tool around a shop. Made of a hardwood handle with a
swinging steel arm at each end, to which is attached a strong steel lock
for engaging the handles of a battery box. Sold singly or in pairs.

                           Prices on request.

                  *       *       *       *       *


                         AMBU Battery Turntable

[Illustration]

Designed to make the handling of a battery on the work bench easy.
Permits getting at all sides of the battery with least amount of effort.

Made of two stout pieces of hard wood pivoted to each other and mounted
on ball bearings. It is also handy for working on heavy generators and
starting motors.

                           Price on request.

            =_Write for Catalog M-53 Helps for Battery Men_=

                  *       *       *       *       *




                   AMBU HELPS for the Service Station


                  *       *       *       *       *


                          AMBU WASHBURN Torch

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

                  For Lead Burning, Soldering, Brazing

                       USING PREST-O-LITE GAS AND
                             COMPRESSED AIR

This torch produces a soft pointed flame. Especially adapted for all
torch uses in repairing of storage batteries. Can be nosed into post
builder; stirring molten lead with nose of torch without popping out.
Not affected by wind. Burns clean, requiring heat up to 5300 degrees
Fahrenheit.

The torch operates on Prest-o-lite Gas and Compressed Air. Tank
attachment on Mixing Valve is easily adapted to A, B or E size
Prest-o-lite tank. Air derived from any air line furnishing 20 lbs.
pressure or over. Small air tank with foot pump can be used. Needle
point flame instantly adjustable through a range of 4000 degrees without
changing tip. The most economical, efficient and time saving torch on
the market doing the same class of work.

                     =Complete Outfit Consists of:=

                    1 Torch
                    1 Soldering Iron Attachment
                    Hose connections
                    1 Mixing Valve (Tank Attachment)
                    2 Six-foot Hose Lengths
                    1 Prest-o-lite Tank Key

                           Price on request.

[Illustration]

                    =RADIATOR SOLDERING ATTACHMENTS=

These attachments are great time savers in the repairing of radiators,
giving the operator a combination open flame and soldering iron in
repairing tubular and honeycomb radiators.

Sold only for use with the Ambu Washburn Torch.

                  *       *       *       *       *


                       AMBU Electric Solder Iron

[Illustration]

Works wherever there is a storage battery, on the car, in the shop or
garage.

Furnished complete with wires, clamps, supply of carbon tips, wire
solder and solder paste. Ready to use.

Handy for quick soldering jobs.

Is not necessary to wait fifteen minutes, nor even one minute to get it
hot—IT HEATS UP INSTANTLY. Cannot burn out—no parts to break. No current
wasted when not in use. Price on request.

                  *       *       *       *       *


                   Ford Standard Electrical Equipment

        =SERVICE MANUAL ON FORD STARTING, LIGHTING AND IGNITION=

[Illustration]

Covers F-A or Liberty Electrical System now standard equipment now put
on the Ford car at the factory.

Each unit is described in detail and illustrated by internal and
external wiring diagrams.

Complete instruction is also given on the location and correction of
starting, lighting, and ignition troubles.

Tells how to adjust the generator. Explained so clearly and simply that
even the inexperienced can make necessary repairs or adjustments. No
mechanic or owner who attempts repairs on this system can afford to be
without this authoritative book.

Printed on high grade enameled paper with flexible binding—150 pages—49
illustrations.

Money back if not satisfied and book is returned within five days.

                       =Price delivered= =$2.00=

            =_Write for Catalog M-53 Helps for Battery Men_=

                  *       *       *       *       *




                   AMBU HELPS for the Service Station


                  *       *       *       *       *


                          AMBU Service Manuals

[Illustration]

Containing both internal and external wiring diagrams, test and
performance data.

Illustrates each type of starting motor, generator, cut-out or regulator
by large diagrams. Shows field coils, brushes and connections exactly as
they should be. Internal diagram of generator, also shows wiring of
cut-out or regulator, ammeter and battery on same page, thus giving
clear diagram of entire charging circuit.

Prepared so that you can instantly find information you desire. Car
Equipment Tables give name of car, model, year, make of equipment, type
of generator, its regulation, type of starting motor, and instantly
gives you description, test data, setting of generator, the drive, test
data and description of starting motor. A separate list is also given of
each make and type of generator and starting motor so that if you do not
know the car model but have the number or type of generator or starting
motor, the information is easily found.

Contains also a Battery Table, furnishing make, type, voltage, ampere
hour capacity, dimensions and order number of battery used on each
particular car.

Each book is printed on strong kraft paper, in a beautiful flexible
binding, containing over 600 pages.

                Ambu 1920-21 Service Manual}
                Ambu 1918-19 Service Manual} $5.75 Each
                Ambu 1916-17 Service Manual}

                  *       *       *       *       *


                     The Automobile Storage Battery

                         =Its Care and Repair=

        (=Over 30,000 copies sold since first edition released=)

               =COMPLETE READY REFERENCE FOR BATTERY MEN=

[Illustration]

It gives complete information on what a storage battery is, how to take
care of it, the tools required, the right shop equipment, proper
charging methods, best repair methods, etc.

There are 400 pages written in easy-to-understand language, profusely
illustrated with diagrams and photographic reproductions that bring out
the text matter clearly. The theory, manufacture and maintenance are
explained in detail, also complete instructions given on the efficient
management and operation of a battery repair shop.

This book is recognized as the most complete and authoritative treatise
on the automobile storage battery that has ever been published.

Guaranteed satisfactory or money refunded, if book is returned within
five days after receipt.

                         Price, delivered $5.00

            =_Write for Catalog M-53 Helps for Battery Men_=

                  *       *       *       *       *

                PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE

                  *       *       *       *       *




 _A Simple System that Locates Electrical Trouble Quickly, Efficiently,
                              Unfailingly_


                  *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AMBU Trouble Shooter System~]

Makes starting, lighting, ignition and battery repair work definite,
accurate, more profitable. Eliminates all guesswork, groping in the
dark, trusting to luck methods. Provides the necessary and essential
testing equipment for auto electric repair in one compact, portable
efficient system.

[Illustration]

                 Brings You More Business, More Profits


Thousands of garages, repair shops, battery and electric service
stations are adding hundreds of dollars and new customers through the
use of the AMBU system. Millions of car owners know of the worlds and
worlds of trouble the electric equipment of a car is giving. They are
seeking the shop well equipped and that KNOWS HOW. With the AMBU System
and a knowledge of electricity your ability to handle electrical repair
work is never in doubt. AMBU enables you to locate trouble in ONE SIXTH
the time usually required and far more efficiently.

          Makes You the Electrical Master of Over 1300 Models


With between 600 and 700 different types of starting, lighting, ignition
and battery equipment used in over 1,300 makes and models of cars, no
man can even expect to know their details—regulation—rates of charge,
discharge, motor and generator, test data, etc. The AMBU System supplies
these bewildering details, quickly, easily and accurately. No matter
what is wrong—The AMBU System shoots the trouble and never fails.

       An Official AMBU Franchise Brings You Prestige and Profits


To secure a franchise for an Official Ambu Service Station is to have
greater prestige and earn more and bigger profits. Automobile owners
from Coast to Coast know that the Official Ambu Service Station sign on
a garage, repair shop, battery or electrical Service Station stands for
the highest degree of efficiency in electrical repair work. To maintain
this reputation AMBU Franchises are given with care. If you are not now
qualified—we have a plan that will give you the necessary knowledge.

Most auto troubles are found in the electric equipment; and require
hours of searching; from the commutator to the battery and back again.
Equip yourself to eliminate this useless searching and make the big
profits. The cost of AMBU is a trifling detail compared to its
tremendous earning power. You can pay as you earn on our deferred
payment plan if you choose.

             AMBU Specific Details And Plans Win Customers


The free test day plan brings new customers to you at once. The monthly
test card assures you a steady number of permanent customers and a fixed
income. Motorists pay you in advance for monthly testing service and
give you all repair work. You circularize the car owners in your
community with letters, mailings, literature and selling ideas supplied
free by us. We help you build your business bigger, better and more
profitable.

                  =Write To-day For Full Information=

Not a single minute to lose. Write now for further facts. Act Quick.

                  American Bureau of Engineering, Inc.

                2632 Prairie Avenue - - - CHICAGO, ILL.

                  *       *       *       *       *




                   AMBU HELPS for the Service Station


                  *       *       *       *       *


                          AMBU Battery Tester

                  =FOR AUTO OR RADIO STORAGE BATTERIES
              A Quick Seller For Your Accessory Department
                       RED, WHITE AND GREEN BALLS
               TELL SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF BATTERY SOLUTION=

[Illustration]

Simplest, most efficient and easiest to read battery tester ever yet
offered to the battery owner. Unlike any hydrometer or tester on the
market. Instead of the glass float used on ordinary hydrometers, which
are hard to read and understand, it has three balls, colored red, white
and green which tell the whole story.

Astonishingly simple to test a battery with it, because the following
jingle regarding the three balls, and the positions they assume in the
electrolyte or liquid tells the story—

              “Floats all three, battery is charged fully.
              Sinks the white, charge still right,
              Sinks the green, charge is lean,
              Sinks the red, charge is dead.”

A battery can be tested with it with as much accuracy as any hydrometer
on the market. The specific gravity of each ball is accurate to the
fourth decimal point. It can be “read” in semi-darkness.

Is only 6½ inches long and designed so that it can be carried in the
tool box where it is _Always Handy_—A mighty big value for only 75c.

Furnished to the Dealer in an attractive counter display box, one dozen
to each package. When placed on the counter it sells itself.

Write for dealers' prices and details on this fast selling article.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE

                  *       *       *       *       *




                                AND NOW—


You have been reading how to increase the profits of your shop through
the use of materials previously wasted. There is another way of stopping
leaks and increasing earnings. That is by making the best possible use
of every man's time.

In this connection we would like to tell you briefly about the
activities of the Educational Division of the American Bureau of
Engineering, Inc.

This institution foresaw the need of providing instruction on
fundamental electricity, ignition, starting and lighting and storage
batteries, so that garage owners, foremen, general repair men and
mechanics could handle electrical repair jobs at a profit.

[Illustration]

  Here in Chicago we are offering an eight weeks' course of forty-four
  hours per week, devoted to intensive instruction in theory and
  practical shop work. This training enables the student to become an
  expert in this highly specialized field, fitting him to supervise
  the work of other mechanics or to operate a shop of his own as an
  expert in Automotive Electrical Repairs.

  For those unable to leave their employment and come to Chicago, we
  have developed a series of Home Study problems and solutions which
  have proved interesting and practical. Lesson schedules can be
  arranged to suit the individual student. Close personal cooperation
  aids the Home Study student in making satisfactory progress.

  The two methods of instruction are identical with the exception that
  the Resident Student gets actual practice in addition to theory.

  Through our other activities we are able to keep in close touch with
  the situation and be certain that the instruction offered is
  strictly up-to-date and practical.

 =In writing for catalogue PLEASE ADVISE if you want information of study
                       in Chicago or study at home=

                  =American Bureau of Engineering, Inc.=

                                =Dept. LM=

                 =2632 Prairie Avenue - - CHICAGO, ILL.=

           =We graduate some excellent Automotive Electricians.
                      If in need of a man WRITE US.=

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AMBU]

_AMBU PRODUCTS_

                    Are Time Savers and Money Savers
                    Tried and Proven by Years of Use

                         That's Why the Careful
                            Buyer Insists on

                                                         _AMBU PRODUCTS_




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 2. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 4. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Profits from scrap, by 
American bureau of engineering

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROFITS FROM SCRAP ***

***** This file should be named 52754-0.txt or 52754-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/7/5/52754/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
